Oh
I am International Master John
Bartholomew and it is my great pleasure
to welcome the world champion Magnus
Carlsen here to our impromptu accessible
studio in white ganze the Netherlands
Magnus has generously agreed to do a
little filming with us on his rest day
so thank you for joining us Magnus yeah
thank you yes having a good tournament
so far and man we'll see ya might be at
the end but it's still a way to go a few
rounds left and we're gonna practice a
few end games today Magnus is gonna take
our basic test for 100 games you must
know my Grandmaster hey-zeus de la via a
video course that I just finished
filming and how do you feel about taking
some basic theoretical end games you
were saying before we went live here
that you weren't sure about your
theoretical endgame status I wasn't sure
about my theoretical endgame status and
I know that this is probably the only
book that my father's ever studied and
he I think he could do at least some of
them so in that sense I'm optimistic but
I don't know
like if there are questions about this
square for instance I never learned
about the square okay that's the true
story I never learned about the square
guy so I mean I understand it but I
couldn't exactly recount what the rule
is so okay so Henry Carlsen may be in a
better position to tell us about the
rule of the square instead but then
again I'm better at chess and I'm I'm a
bigger name so that's why I'm here
instead okay
and unfortunately for all of those who
want to learn okay alright so let's get
rolling with the test here no time
pressure but I know you're a competitive
guy you're gonna attempt to do them as
quickly as you can so whenever you're
ready sure click learn next now I'll get
you started okay this this draw yeah
this looks like a draw to me
alright to e3 and the knight is in time
there's always gonna be you for Emison
in the right circuit
Elizabeth one so you know about those
four squares that the Knights should be
yeah was the an to ative now it's in
yeah like intuitive but if the knight is
around III g4f one those squares h2 then
I never thought about the fact that
there were four squares I sort of just
do it
got it Oh black to move is it a draw
no it's not you go King g3o alternative
yeah I came to three and ninety-two
kimchi to was what I was thinking but
kimchi to winds as well
I came g3 and they're getting okay two
for two I didn't know that this endings
were so isn't this the Spassky exercise
maybe it's not game of spassky's no that
was just like no it's not this one is
actually this one is easy but there's a
like a famous exercise that's bus you
had to solve as a kid where it was
similar but I think then the king was
further away so the one that I think is
interesting here is let's say the White
King was on b5 mm-hmm and you play Queen
e2 that's the interesting one I yes then
you have to go King i1 instead of Queen
sorry was also it's prompting you to
find an equivalent winning move so yes
Queen e2 would suffice
yeah queen bee queen c3 this is
confusing every single move is I think
Queen b3 will do it yes I mean I would
never go queen bee through I would go
King Queen d2 every single time contact
mister hey Olivia
okay queen a3 is winning as well what
does it want now Quincy Quincy three and
now King bee three mm-hmm this was an
unnecessary complicated solution I agree
with that yeah this was now that III
once again this this line yeah right
here let's say black boy king b2 and it
was white to move Queen e2 and King with
one Lucius to King c4c ah the King b3
but King a1 actually draws that's
actually a problem that's given in this
course yeah excel so that's a common
mistake yeah black to play so rook e1
Sims okay there would be 66 Louis's
obviously so rook e1 and I'm just
curious so that's the Klingon horowitz
technique is that something you can put
a name to that or is it no I couldn't
put the name to it what I would note is
that rook f1 would have made a draw if
the white rook was not only a file so
can i oh you probably can't edit our
butts no the point is like rook F 1 King
e6 King f8 and so on going to the short
side yeah going look then white pushes
the pawn to e6 and because black cannot
occupy the a file then it's it's winning
got it otherwise it would be a drum okay
another Knight verse Paul Wow so this is
I think you need to go to F 2 cos Knight
g3 there's King e5 and it doesn't seem
to be in time so this is the best way to
keep the King out mm-hmm we start moving
with the King and I think the black king
is going to be stuck in the corner
that's nice yeah I like the visual
effect of the barrier after night off to
all the squares that the night controls
that have worked from exactly
that's a nice position so it's all been
Oh black to move is this a draw so we
need to get the King to see for like
Fischer did a nice game against whomever
some Soviet player so against time ago
from its I have enough yeah and okay
Bishop chief I've no idea why that was
better but the point is in the after
Bishop d6 you need King c4 Donny
syndrome right so stopping Bishop c5
yeah there was like kappa blanka enough
sky think we're black just resigned but
fisher later showed but I could make a
trough huh oh why to move
is this a draw no it's not even close to
a draw just go Bishop h6 j 7 then wait a
second then fish Wow
alternative might be Bishop D 444 yeah
but the point is why not Bishop c5 yeah
that would win pretty directly
Bishop's III uh-huh and then probably
Bishop before or like I mean there are a
million ways to win yeah mission t2 then
Bishop h6 okay yep
yeah so short diagonal for the bishop
yeah short diagonal long solutions
so this one is yeah Bishop c4 Bishop c4
looses the thing is usually when yeah
Bishop d7 is in is an easy draw just
just wait but with Bishop c4 so usually
lacking would be like on e7 then and
then then you give a check force the
king one way and you go with the King V
the other way and but yes exactly here
Bishop g5 asking the king has already
been forced f7 you can go Bishop g5 and
then controlling the f6 squares the atom
can come around yeah exactly and
whenever Bishop attacks f5 then you give
a check on a6
yeah right okay okay i how to okay yeah
pom-poms move this way mm-hm
uh yeah this is an easy draw just
control the diagonal yes another one
bishop g3 or f4 f4 maybe no bishop were
playing as to me we're going to h2 Hey
that your yep yeah I had the feeling the
first time and Bishop to be 8 right
that's nice and safe stop King a7 yep uh
yeah it's a well-known principle of the
one diagonal in
[Music]
in this upset called bishops ending like
if the bishop can do all its job on on
one diagonal then it's usually an easy
way Sariah
or drones never never black to move I
think this one is an easy win as the
pawns are too far apart and they cannot
be stopped on one diagonals and black
not suffering from the wrong bishop yeah
yeah it's it's just an automatic win I
mean you forced like at some point you
put the pawns of g5 and a5 let's say
White's King on tv4 and Bishop on d1 and
you've already forests why - to make a
choice by zooks one you've one of the
pawns advance and then wherever the
White King goes the black King goes the
other way yeah so this one just bring
the King to the right side and the pawn
will not be in time J stomp on the exact
that's a perfect score so far yeah it's
going well the only thing that's
defeated you is the alternative move so
far yeah yeah so this is a standard
pitiful I've seen even very strong
players go wrong here especially in
blitz so the point is a 2 rupee 8 mm
King a3 then King c2 and you'll have to
under promote two knights and and up
Knight will be caught so what do you do
is king b2 and then can you see one
right which a lot of people find
counterintuitive yeah it is I think this
is you just have to know right yeah yeah
that's that's the thing and then you go
to the corner again not not to a3 not
having to do any Knight promotions yeah
I mean need to by a process of
elimination it's easy to find but
otherwise check if you know this you'll
never never forget it
exactly
why to move can he win the ass you're
just grace I'm gonna win the rook King
in no man's land
yeah why to move is it worth playing on
it's a rather leading question I would
say okay again I have two white pawn is
on c2 and black pawn asan
oh okay so I I'm just confused by where
Jesus actually are yeah this is a funny
one
like wow yeah upon two squares away from
ocean but yeah it's it's uh I had one
against real sense of once and in blitz
like I was queening quitting my my pawn
I think I quitted on g1 and he he was
pushing his e pawn and I thought I'd
misplaced my king
like I'd gone with a king to 2s free yes
it had his king on f7 and the other and
the pawn on e7 and for a moment I panic
like there's no check on on on on f2 and
I was running out of time and that I saw
Queen a7 ah nice you could say yeah so
that's yeah that's one of the two
techniques either when when the pawn is
nothing on a 7 or or C seventh right
either pin the pawn or give a bunch of
checks till you till the King has to
step in front of the pump right okay
why to move okay and I have to say on
this is this one this is one that
tripped up your father for a little bit
oh yeah yes
Hendrik had a hard time with this yeah I
would say this one is pretty pretty easy
you go King c6 and then you take the
opposition push the bomb and that's it
okay now yep it's an unusual exercise
but almost process of elimination
yeah as well
sir reminds me about exercise where I
have to put three wide ponds and like to
move with King and no phones and it's is
still villa draw yeah what to move so d4
would be decisive so you have to go d4
and then take the opposition so this one
I'm kind of curious if we go back to the
first position uh-huh
and obviously you know white should play
d4 but if they blunder with the King
move and black is allowed to play d4 do
you think in terms of e squares or is
that a concept that again is maybe
couldn't put a name to it no III again I
couldn't put a name to it I just know
that whenever the King reaches the third
rank it doesn't the opposition doesn't
matter hmm
if the pawn is one is still away so I
don't know for me I know I mean I don't
think of key moves I just think of
interesting resins yeah exactly whose
dealer via is quite explicit in this and
showing okay the key squares for the
black King RC 3 d3 III yeah I can get it
there with a pawn on the 4th rank they
win yeah yeah I'm not the best person to
teach cuz I would just say yeah this is
it's a good model though yeah I'm sure
name these techniques sure I I remember
I mean starting out I found funded a bit
counterintuitive that white gets the
opposition but you still went right but
yeah no I guess having access to all the
three quid key squares is is the key
right okay ten problems to go yeah white
sand move can he draw
mm-hmm
yeah I actually can't now that took me
it took me more time than it should've
but I was thinking you were pondering
the orientation again yeah I mean so
what I was thinking was knighted for
King D 2 but took me a little while to
say 96 I know okay
a nice work idea my emotes yeah a knight
a for King D 296 that is nice moving
further away buds I'm getting that fork
why to move can he win white spawns wide
spawn is moving this way so you just go
and I'll flank and that's gonna be it
that's another one I think amateur
players find counterintuitive yeah I
given this the students in the past and
it's just it kind of blows their mind
that the king should go diagonal and
around the pond they always want to go
directly up bring the king to f4 yeah
yeah for me I mean it's just you quickly
eliminate the other possibility so and
then it has to be then it has to be the
way around right but it yeah it's it's a
good lesson what is the correct result
yes so here here the thing is I think
you have to to avoid a few key squares
as black so I think the way to go is
King to f1 uh-huh and King to g1 and if
you yeah if you find the right squares
then you should just never go to g2
whenever you go to g2 I think it's it's
I I see that in that variation it's it's
it's lost down exactly never go to g2
because then then the white yeah once
one thing Queen gets to e2 then it's
it's it's lost so always yeah keep the
keep the king away from from g2 and then
done is wrong
yeah this one is tricky mm-hmm never
allow that White King to come in
yeah with the black king Horrocks
exactly yeah this is the key position
right it's one of my favorite chess
positions like just the domination
aspect of it yeah why to move can he win
um so I would guess it's a fairly easy
win just cut off the king exactly
cutting off the otherwise just it's just
in trouble no no no wipes everything is
active enough in that case yeah this is
another one that it's easy to go wrong
especially and it's vegetables specially
in blitz cuz intuitively you kind of
want to cut it the King off the other
wire but this one is more way more
effective right why to move what is the
correct result the correct result is a
drug his wife goes came to e1 and black
cannot take the opposition mm-hmm that's
it yep straight forward yeah
white move can he win so what I suspect
is that h5 wins and the restaurant cuz
you need to I mean I add this I also
have to say it I don't know hmm but
stairs like point system where you get
points for the poem that is not past
being as far back as possible and the
other poem being as far advanced as
possible and so you get to plus a minus
system and if you're in the plus then
you win if you're if it's equal area or
in the mine sister draw I've never heard
of that method no I mean but I looks
like bears rule ah okay yes I believe de
la via mentions that it's yeah I'm at
zero but I mean it's very easy to
calculate
these things but yeah I didn't don't
really know the other rule but but but
exactly I mean the principle is keep the
pass bonus as far back as possible and
it advanced the other eponymous he says
h5 that's right this one white scoops it
yeah black will get back in time suppose
you've already spent 30 of your 50 moves
it should be plenty of time 97 Bishop d3
building a barrier fish to e4 okay agus
is another reference Bishop e5 instead
yep King d6
that's the move I wanted to play too but
he wants Knight f6 hmm yeah different
setup yeah so what I would usually do
from a start is that would go fish
before then King King d8 King d6 Qing yi
eight Bishop g6 and revert to the W
shape
agreed yeah okay whatever he wants
Knight f6 he's gonna get it say hey
there we go
de la vie approved yeah okay why to move
can he draw also this is another one of
these exercises right is this the one
where you have to I'm just trying to see
if there's any wrong those incorrect you
need to
five and King e6 exactly I thought it
was so black gets the setup you were
kind of talking about earlier yeah
flaking yeah but in its yeah that was
unusual in the sense that the King is on
the other side right on a different side
maybe you can just click through that
very yeah that's nice
so this King do five and um and it's an
EC domination in the center of the way
cher ami not wait to go King if I
probably but so King f6 396 King me 7
you can get the check on you 5 but then
king of faith and why just in time mmm
nice yeah blacks probably one square
away I also know who wants me to do it
again right part of chess opposed yeah
module here yeah okay okay so we got you
on one problem yeah you're doing it
let's hope I don't get that one in the
game okay
the pawn is moving toward this side so
here it's again now flanking or no this
is called shouldering away that's the
thing and now the White King can I
cannot get close and that move kind of
reminds me of Kings c1 with the position
with the a pawn yeah exactly
continuing to shoulder yeah nice again
one once you know it's it's pretty
pretty easy but it's kind of
counterintuitive so this is a bit of a
weirdly phrase problem here yeah once I
just an orientation or the orientation
is is difficult so the king is on c1
pawns on f6 this pawns on d5 five mm-hmm
okay I just have to mmm put on some t5
the other points on f6 and the black
console okay now I have now I have the
position in my head some world champion
visualization here gets so yeah Quincy
five takes takes king d2 King d6 King
III King e5 King Day - you can't get the
opposition so no you cannot trade Queens
okay so I would say solve that one
correctly yeah I just so so hard for me
to visualize from yeah from from the
black site yeah
and that's always an important decision
right whether to trade into a pawn
endgame I think amateurs often make
those decisions kind of lightly yeah I
mean for me I would I would never trade
Queens there cuz if you cuz if you if
you keep the coins it's such an easy win
mm-hm but but yeah okay fantastic so
that was the basic test in 100 and games
you must know by the way the basic test
I think it's actually fairly challenging
for the vast majority of players yeah I
thought a lot of them were not that easy
and most of all a lot of them were were
quite unfamiliar yeah so because de la
va says that these are positions he
believes a first category player should
know all of them which i think is a bit
ambitious but certainly highly useful
all of them definitely again a lot of
them were new to me but it's knowing
this stuff will certainly yeah save you
a bunch of health points in terms of
winning or or seven control yeah well
that was great thank you so much for
explaining your thought process and
just a couple endgame follow-up
questions because I think our viewers
would be very interested to know so what
does without giving too much away what
does your endgame work look like these
days are you actively drilling
theoretical positions or as most of your
endgame work on more higher level stuff
so yeah in recent years have certainly
done some work and on theoretical
endings I'm just repeating and trying to
get more more confidence there but then
again normally playing end games is more
about it's more about positional
understanding and besides you know end
games I get or often better because I
play better in the middle game yeah but
you're obviously known as a fantastic
end game player and yeah so so what I
would say is that I was known as a very
good end game player but meanwhile my
theoretical endings were actually not
that great but now I think that part is
catching up a bit like I'm getting more
confident there as well that's a
follow-up question I had so I read a
book some years ago and it was a
collection of your games and the author
I can't remember the name of the book
but the author speculated that in the
mid 2000s or so you perhaps spent more
time working on your end game than you
had previously I was wondering if there
was any pivotal moment or game or just
realization that you had that encouraged
you to do that um I would say in the
early 2000s I worked quite a bit on on
my end game um but late to mid to late
2000s no I wouldn't say so at all I just
got a lot of experience playing the best
players in the world and I went from you
know losing end games to losing equal
end games to to winning them because I
gained more experience okay I understood
the game better so I wouldn't say there
was a concerted effort
there I mean I definitely made an effort
in the early 2000s but not not later got
it because one game I actually go over
in our hundred end games boot camp and
also in the course is a rook ending us
two Aronian at the TI Morial 2006 you
have to bring up bad memories yeah sure
that was real lapse in concentration at
that one but obviously if I had been
more confident in in my endings then I
wouldn't have have bashed it yeah so I
think that was the case of me playing
end games better in general but still
not being confident about the
theoretical and those games hurt as
every chess player can attest to oh yeah
for sure you never feel more more stupid
than that than red like I remember that
game like playing playing good defense
for so long and then falling at the last
hurdle yep exactly well you've certainly
played many games since then to make up
for it and we wish you the best of luck
in this tournament with three rounds
remaining yeah I mean I've actually even
become a pretty decent defender of route
Kendall's - oh yeah to my surprise so
many games stand out in your head to
that degree these people can can check
out that I've held a bunch of them mmm
recently so I'm happy about that
fantastic well thanks again Magnus for
joining us we really appreciate it
Shinda best of luck in Tata Steel the
rest of the way yeah thank you